                                                                                                        1




                 Academia’s Black Box: The Peer Review Crisis

              A Brief Analysis of Peer Review Process Flows and Their Systemic Vulnerabilities




                                                Carlo Morelli†


                            College of Doctoral Studies, Grand Canyon University


                           RES-820C-0501: The Literature Landscape: Psychology


                                             Dr. Stacey Bridges


                                               October 9, 2021




                                                Author Note


   †
       Carlo Morelli: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5836-7310


   No known conflicts of interest to disclose. Funding for this research was provided by Grand Canyon

University and federal student loans. Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Carlo

Morelli, College of Doctoral Studies, Grand Canyon University. Email: cmorelliii@my.gcu.edu
PEER REVIEW CRISIS                                                                                              2


                                                    Abstract



         This paper intends to offer evidence that a crisis exists in peer-reviewed academic publishing whose

     damaging effects impact the academic integrity of the entire worldwide corpus of scholarly research,

     threaten to undermine confidence in all scholarship, and could lead to an epistemological catastrophe if

     left unaddressed.



                    Identifying the Main Problems and Potential Consequences


   A crisis exists in peer-reviewed academic publishing whose damaging effects impact the academic

integrity of the entire worldwide corpus of scholarly research, threaten to undermine confidence in all

scholarship. If left unaddressed, this exigent clutch in academic research could lead to an epistemological

catastrophe. The problem may be stated simply: No universal standards or processes for peer review exist

in scholarly academic publishing (Klebel, Reichmann, Polka, McDowell, Penfold, Hindle, & Ross-Hellauer,

2020). The evidence for this lack of process clarity and standardization is shocking: According to Klebel

et al. (2020), approximately three-fourths of all academic journals offer no insight into their peer review

processes, the identities or credentials of the reviewers, the sources of funding for the research and any

associated conflicts of interest, or indicate whether the published documents being presented as

peer-reviewed are merely preprints or are fully-vetted and edited for publication.


   For the earnest doctoral student or practicing academician, this dearth of quality control is an

architectonic nightmare: All academic scholarship is predicated on the notion of citation; in other words,

scholars’ most basic epistemological footing rest upon the reliability and integrity of their cited and

referenced works. If these works’ quality cannot be measured, guaranteed, or otherwise verified, the

quality of any scholarship built upon such references is potentially a house of cards. Any new research

inherits all the defects of its cited works: Since the validity and authority of of modern academic

scholarship is intended to build upon the findings of its references, fuzzy or undefined peer review

standards leave the modern researcher in a quandary; the justification and bona fides of academic writing

is only as strong as its antecedent referenced citations (Klebel et al., 2020).


                                              Possible Solutions


   According to a commentary by Makel (2014), the practical inability for most scholars to replicate the

research findings they abstract and build upon from their cited works demands the rigor of peer review for

those cited works be utterly paramount. Makel offers a novel solution to the syndrome of extant defects in
PEER REVIEW CRISIS                                                                                            3


peer review, namely, to mandate all academic journals outsource their peer review to an unrelated (and

presumably objectively distant and unbiased) third party (2014). Makel further suggests academicians

submit their preprint manuscripts to online open-access archives and repositories before endeavoring to

publish to give the greater community of scholars a chance to critique the manuscript long before it even

reaches the peer review stage (2014). Finally, Makel proposes all future scholarly articles be required to

offer co-citations, that is, cite the original peer-reviewed article, then cite another totally independent

peer-reviewed article which replicates or otherwise verifies the findings of the original (2014).


                                                 Conclusion


   These recommendations may help reduce the chance that future scholarship is unintentionally biased

or inadvertently bolsters or restates a false or poorly-validated claim to truth. Truth has been, since at

least the dawn of rational and empirical inquiry in Ancient Greece, the goal of all research. The exact

quote from which this ethical mandate is paraphrased is taken from Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics: “τὸν

αὐτὸν δὴ1 τρόπον καὶ ἀποδέχεσθαι χρεὼν ἕκαστον τῶν λεγομένων· πεπαιδευμένου γάρ ἐστιν ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον

τἀκριβὲς ἐπιζητεῖν καθ᾿ ἕκαστον γένος ἐφ᾿ ὅσον ἡ τοῦ πράγματος φύσις ἐπιδέχεται·,” (Aristotle, ca. 350

B.C.E./1926, p. 8, lines 21-25).


   The precise English translation Horace Rackham gives is “Accordingly we may ask the student also to

accept the various views we put forward in the same spirit; for it is the mark of an educated mind to

expect that amount of exactness in each kind which the nature of the particular subject admits,”

(Aristotle, ca. 350 B.C.E./1926, p. 9, trans. H. Rackham). This author shares Aristotle’ conclusion: it is

the scholar’s moral obligation to pursue and, above all else, ascertain the truth to its most granular and

atomic fineness (Aristotle, ca. 350 B.C.E./1926).
PEER REVIEW CRISIS                                                                                         4


                                                References



Aristotle. (1926). Nicomachean ethics (H. Rackham, Trans.). In, Loeb Classical Library [73]. Harvard University

        Press. (Original work published ca. 350 B.C.E.). (Cit. on p. 3)

Klebel, T., Reichmann, S., Polka, J., McDowell, G., Penfold, N., Hindle, S., & Ross-Hellauer, T. (2020).

        Peer review and preprint policies are unclear at most major journals. PLOS One, 15 (10), 1–19.

        https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.24.918995 (cit. on p. 2)

Makel, M. C. (2014). The empirical march: Making science better at self-correction. Psychology of Aesthetics,

        Creativity, and the Arts, 8 (1), 2–7. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0035803 (cit. on pp. 2, 3)
